Using the World Bank's website,
let's take a look at interest rates
in different parts of the world.
We will look at what is called the real interest rates,
which accounts for prices that are high or low,
as opposed to just regular interest rates,
called nominal interest,
which does not account for changes in prices.
So, here you can see the interest rate by country.
And this is incredibly important
when considering investing in the bonds or stocks
of a country that has a lot of debt.
And we can see that the interest rates are
in the low single digits in North America,
but in other countries, it can be well
into the double digits,
partially because of inflation.
Let's talk about why interest rates are high
in some parts of the world.
It's primarily because high prices
means inflation that governments are trying to control.
Okay, bear with me here.
This will make sense in a sec.
So, high prices occur in many places
for different reasons, including very high
demand for products, geopolitical reasons
impacting the price of oil,
or other economic mismanagement policies.
So a demand is rising for products in a country.
And the supply of those products
does not increase as much as demand does.
Then prices increase.
And the same can be said if demand is unchanged,
but the supply drops a lot.
Then the price goes up.
And I'll give you examples.
So, one example is in the 1970s.
On a few occasions, and partially due
to geopolitical reasons,
the amount of oil that many countries
could access to declined a lot.
And as a result, gas prices increased big time
in many countries.
See, when prices increase it's called inflation.
And when prices increase
and GDP growth slows a lot,
or even contracts, meaning goes down,
this is called stagflation.
And in general, how can we stop prices from rising?
Well, you can either increase the supply
of those products or decrease the demand, okay?
And so, since it's hard for governments
to figure out how to increase the supply of stuff we buy,
then they have to resort to decreasing consumer demand.
So, how do they do this?
How do governments decrease our demand
for products that we want to buy?
Well, governments do this by making
the money supply lower, okay?
Now, when there's less money out there in circulation,
then the price of money goes up a lot, okay?
How does this work?
Well, let me discuss an example first.
And this is something that resonates closely.
My kids love this product.
Okay so, this here, this is the Nintendo Switch.
And when it first came out,
you couldn't find it anywhere.
It was, demand was red hot and supply was limited.
As a result, many people bought
this product on eBay for way, way more
than the price this product was supposed to be for.
Then eventually, Nintendo was able to produce
a lot more of these products,
and supply caught up with demand.
As a result, the price finally decreased for this product.
Now, if the CEO of Nintendo decided
to make fewer of these units,
and demand stayed constant, meaning unchanged,
then of course the price would increase
a lot for this product.
So, who is the CEO in charge
of a country's supply of money?
Well, the CEO in charge of a country's supply of money,
so to speak, in the United States,
this person is called the Federal Reserve chairperson, okay?
And we call it the Fed.
And in other countries, the person in charge
of changing the supply of money
is called the governor or the bank of that country,
or the minister of finance,
or in the case of Europe,
the European Central Bank, which is called the ECB,
European Central Bank.
So, how do all these people that are
in charge of money raise or lower interest rates?
Well, they do this by increasing
or decreasing the money supply.
Quite often, through buying or selling bonds.
As a quick side note.
If you or me were to get a loan from a bank,
we would pay interest on that loan
until we had to pay it back to the bank.
When governments get loans from banks,
it's not called a loan.
It's called a bond.
And the government issues a bond,
and then they pay whoever owns the bond interest,
kind of like a loan.
So, if the government of a country
buys those bonds back from the larger banks
in their country, then what happens is
the banks get more money.
More money is put, this is fake cash.
So what happens is the banks get more money.
Okay so, the banks now have more money out there.
And in return, the government gets the bond back.
So if the government buys a bond from a bank,
the banks give that bond back to the government
and the government gives the banks money.
Okay so, I'll give you an example.
This here is a bond.
And this was issued by the city of Los Angeles.
And so, if a lot of banks own these bonds,
and then the government said,
hey, I want to buy that bond back for a little bit
more than what you paid,
the government buys the bond back,
the bank gives the bond back to the government,
in this case, the government or city of Los Angeles,
and then in return, because the government
bought this from the banks,
the banks will get cash.
So there's more cash, fake cash,
there's more cash out there.
More cash out there.
And more money in supply basically means that
the banks are going to lend out more money
because they have more money,
and so, what happens is, let me just put
this fake money down.
Damn, it looks real though.
What happens is more money supply in circulation
means that prices go down for money
as there's more money to go around,
kind of like the Nintendo thing.
So, this means if interest rates,
this means that interest rates go down
when the money supply has increased, okay?
Great.
So, and interest rates are also called
the discount rates.
That's just another word for interest rates,
discount rates, or LIBOR in Europe,
which stands for, LIBOR stands for
London Interbank Offer Rate.
Okay, which is based on five currencies in Europe.
They got the yen, US dollar, the euro,
the British pound, and the Swiss franc, for now.
Okay, the whole process of changing
the amount of money out there
is called QE, or quantitative easing.
And it just means it gets easier to get money
as the quantity of money increases.
If the quantity of these units increases a lot,
then the price goes down.
Same thing with money.
If there's a lot more money in society out there,
then the demand for, or the price of money goes down
because there's just tons of it.
And the price of money is done through interest rates.
Just think of it that way, okay?
Price of money equals interest rates.
So when you buy a product from the store,
the source sells it to you at their retail value,
which is higher than what they bought the product for
when they paid wholesale.
And this is how it works with banks.
Banks buy money, they get money basically
from the governments at a certain interest rate,
which is the price, and then the banks
make money by lending it out at
a little bit higher interest rate,
in order to make a profit.
And the opposite thing occurred,
meaning the government sold a lot of bonds
to get banks in their country
to give them money back.
So, if the government basically said,
hey, I got a bond.
Anybody want to buy a bond?
And the banks are like, I don't really know.
The government's like, well, I'll give
you good interest rate.
So, what happens is, sorry, it's upside down,
the banks buy this bond
and the government gets the money from the banks.
So now there's less money out there
for the banks to lend.
So interest rates go up.
Okay, it makes sense?
Okay great, and if you have questions about this,
please let me know.
Okay, cool.
Therefore, if there's less money now
that the banks can lend to us all,
then demand for money increases
relative to the lower supply of money.
And interest rates rise.
Okay, so it's all about supply and demand.
The government changes the supply of money
that the banks have access to,
which changes the price of money,
meaning it changes the interest rate of money.
And this process is called monetary policy,
which is a country's money policy.
And this is crucial for all investors
globally to understand for so many reasons.
One of which is the fact that
investors must figure out or have
a general sense for how much money
companies can make in the future,
and then discount that future money
that companies make, okay?
Into today's terms.
So they can calculate what a company is worth today
that will make money in the future.
And this is referred to as the time value of money,
which you covered in the first exercise of the course.
If this seems a little bit complicated
for you to understand,
think of it this way.
At the beginning of the course, we said,
okay, we got a dollar today.
That's worth a lot more in the future.
The future value of the money.
I want you to think of the opposite.
So, if companies make a lot of money in the future,
what's that future money worth today?
Well, we need to use interest rates
to figure out that future value
and turn it into present value, okay?
And you could play around this in Excel as well.
We use the FV formula, future value.
You can enter in the PV formula as well.
A little off topic but anyway,
if you have questions, let me know.
So, a crucial input into calculating
what the time value of money is for a company
is the current interest rate
that the company operates in, okay?
And one of the most powerful tools
that a country has is the ability
to change their interest rate.
And when times are tough,
and when we're in a recession
or about to enter a potential recession,
you know what governments do?
They cut, meaning they lower the interest rate
in order to stimulate the economy, okay?
Now we understand why governments
raise interest rates when the economy is doing well.
They raise interest rates partially
so they can have a few bullets in the chamber,
in case they have to
(gunshots)
jumpstart the economy at some point
in the future when the economy is not doing well.
So, governments raise interest rates
so that they can stimulate the economy in the future
by cutting rates, okay?
And you might be thinking, wait a second, Chris.
I know of at least one country that has
or has had very high interest rates
and the economy is not doing well.
What's that all about?
Well, some countries have out of control rising prices,
partially due to economic or
government policy mismanagement.
And the only way to stop those prices
from rising out of control
is to increase interest rates.
Germany had incredibly high inflation in the 1920s,
which is called hyperinflation.
And this is crazy but people actually
started using their currency as wallpaper.
It was worthless.
And they also used wheelbarrows to bring money
to the market to buy food.
And a loaf of bread in Germany costs 0.6 marcs in 1918.
And then by 1923, it cost over 200 billion marcs
to buy a single loaf of bread in Germany.
And this is, of course, hyperinflation.
And then, there's a, this note here.
This is, this here is 10 billion Zimbabwe dollars.
And Zimbabwe's currency recently lost
literally 99.9% of its valuation between 2007 and 2008.
And in 2008, the average inflation rate
at one point in Zimbabwe was 98%.
The average daily inflation rate was 98%.
Every day, prices would double.
It's difficult, difficult situation.
In the United States in the late 1970s,
President Carter's approval rating was only 30%,
partially given the fact that inflation was 13%,
and oil prices were way too high.
And there was a, I think they called it
a crisis of confidence at that point.
And gold prices spiked to a record,
at that point, of $376 per ounce.
And we're gonna discuss commodities later, okay?
Gold usually goes up a lot in times of crisis,
which is why we have to be aware
of what the price of gold is.
And if we personally think that
gold prices are gonna go up a lot,
it could be kind of a fearful indicator
for the economy, and I personally, little side note.
I think we should have 10% of our net worth
in commodities at all points in time, okay?
Part of that should be in gold.
And how do we do it?
Well, through the ETF, the great GLD.
Okay, and we'll cover that in much more detail later.
Okay, we'll talk about diversification
in exercise number 24, okay?
But we need to understand how all
these instruments are related, and they are.
Which is why I'm spending time discussing
interest rates, commodities, stocks, et cetera.
And when we discuss your mortgage later,
you will have this aha moment and realize
why we covered interest rates in so much detail.
Let's go back to inflation now,
meaning prices rising.
So, the way the United States dealt with
double digit inflation at that point in the 1970s
was with massive, massive interest rate hikes, okay?
And the head of the US Federal Reserve,
the CEO of money in the US at that point,
was a guy named Paul Volcker.
And Volcker flew to Europe to attend an IMF meeting.
And while he was there,
he met with his good friend, Helmut Schmidt,
who was the chancellor of West Germany at the time.
And Helmut Schmidt helped Volcker
understand how chaotic the economy
would become in the United States
if they did not deal with the inflation rate immediately.
And so, what happened was when the
Federal Reserve in the United States meets,
met at that point, they raised rates.
But let me explain what that means, okay?
In the United States, when the Federal Reserve meets,
and there's not just one person
in the Federal Reserve.
There's a bunch of people in the Federal Reserve.
So back then, Volcker headed it up,
but you've got regional chairpeople
of different states or different regions.
When they all meet, those meetings are called FOMC meetings,
which stands for Federal Open Market Committee meetings.
And the Federal Reserve, or the Fed,
as some people call it,
back then, they raised interest rates a lot.
And this caused a big recession in the United States
that lasted from 1980 to 1982.
And I remember that recession well.
I grew up in Canada, but that recession
really hit us hard.
And when I was a kid, my dad,
I remember the mortgage on our house,
interest rates were actually close to 20%.
And that really hurt the Canadian economy
and my dad too.
I remember it was a tough time when I was a kid,
because in Canada, you cannot write off
the interest on your mortgage,
like you do in the United States,
and I'll explain what all that means later too.
Okay great, so as investors trying to make money,
we need to understand the monetary policy,
not just of our country,
but the monetary policy of other large
countries or trading blocks,
as the policy and decision making
of those countries affects many countries in the world
and almost all countries.
And certainly impacts financial institutions.
Why?
Because their decisions affect what
interest rates professional investors will use
in their financial models,
and how much money the companies that they analyze
might use to fund their growth, okay?
Also, stable economies with higher interest rates
can have much stronger currencies,
which affects the financial models
that professional investors analyze.
Also, higher interest rates mean fewer jobs
and fewer companies are created, yeesh.
Why?
Because when interest rates are high,
we would rather put our money in the bank
in order to get that great return on investment
as bank interest rates are higher.
For example, if interest rates are hypothetically 18%
and the stock market returns,
I don't know, 10 to 15% on a good year,
then we most likely won't buy stocks.
We also won't likely buy as much real estate,
and we won't invest as much in
private venture capital companies,
and we won't buy as many commodities.
Instead, we will put our money in the bank
or buy bonds as the return on our investments
will be superb, relative to the risk
that we're taking on.
Interest rates are high, so put your money in the bank.
And this, of course, assumes that
you are investing in banks that are
ensured by the government.
For example, and we kind of covered this,
for example, in the US,
the government issues you,
insures you, I should say,
the government insures you in banks
up to a value of $250,000 per bank investment.
And this is the FDIC insurance,
or Federal Depository Insurance Corporation,
which we covered when we looked at
exercise number 15, called Is Your Money Safe?
And so, the FDIC exists partially
so we don't lose faith in our financial system
and take all of our money out of the bank,
which is catastrophic,
as the banks can't lend money anymore
to help companies grow.
In fact, and this is awful,
and this is against the law.
But in 2008, hedge funds in New York City
that bet against the banks,
meaning they shorted the stocks
and they wanted the stocks to go down
and make money from it,
what they did was these hedge funds,
they hired actors to line up at banks
so that when the media saw,
oh my gosh, look at all these people lining up,
they thought these people were
lining up to take their money out.
They were manipulating the market
by causing people to panic.
So anyway, it was against the law but
just so you understand how catastrophic
it can be if people take all their money out of banks,
which is why we have insurance,
which we talked about in the exercise 15.
So, you'll notice that when interest rates
are unusually high, like they were in the early 1980s,
then not many companies are born.
Why?
Because potential investors would rather
put their money in the bank or buy bonds
and earn high returns on their
low risk bank or bond investments,
if they are highly rated.
And we'll talk about bond ratings very soon.
Okay, so I want to quickly mention that
if you have a few investment accounts open
at a few banks, transfer some of the money,
if you see savings or interest rates
that are higher at one bank or one account versus another.
Kind of like when you're driving
and you see two gas stations beside each other,
obviously you go to the one with cheaper gas if you can.
Transferring money between accounts
is very easy to do.
And if you do this often enough,
then you'll actually make a sizeable
amount of money in the long run
compared to if you did not do this.
And of course, we need to make sure
that there are no fees or minimal fees
if we want to do this.